The planet Mercury is named after
the messenger of the Roman gods,
because even the ancients could see
how swift and fleeting it is in the sky.
But it wasn't until recently that scientists
began unraveling Mercury's many mysteries.
Mercury is the smallest planet in our solar system.
It's diameter currently measures just over 3,000 miles,
about the size of the continental United States.
Like Earth, Mercury is a terrestrial planet
with three main layers, a core, a mantle, and a crust.
Only Mercury's crust has no tectonic plates.
Also, its iron core is enormous by comparison,
making up 85% of its radius,
while Earth's inner and outer core
account for just 55%.
Because of the core's exceptional size,
it's had a surprising influence
on Mercury's overall size, by causing it to shrink.
The hot iron core has slowly cooled and contracted
over the planet's 4.5 billion years.
In doing so, it pulled Mercury's surface inward,
and has caused the planet to shrink radially
by more than four miles.
This shrinking planet is also the planet closest to the sun,
orbiting our solar system's star at an average
distance of roughly 36 million miles.
Such proximity affects Mercury's atmosphere,
or rather, the lack of one.
It only has a very thin exosphere,
which is traditionally the outermost layer
of a planet's atmosphere.
This exosphere is made of oxygen, sodium,
hydrogen, helium, and potassium,
all whipped up from the planet's surface
by solar winds.
The lack of atmosphere and close proximity to the sun
also makes Mercury a planet of extremes.
The surface temperature can climb
to 800 degrees Fahrenheit during the daytime,
and fall to 290 degrees below zero at night.
Mercury's proximity to the sun is also the reason
behind it's ago old reputation of being swift and fleeting.
The sun's gravity pulls harder on Mercury
than any other planet, and like all planets,
Mercury travels in an elliptical orbit,
slowing down when it's father away from the sun,
and accelerating as it draws closer.
Clocking in at an average speed
of over 100,000 miles per hour,
Mercury slings around the sun in just 88 days.
From Earth, Mercury is difficult to observe
because it's fleeting and so close to the sun.
And so far, it's only been visited by two spacecraft,
NASA's Mariner 10 and Messenger.
Those missions gave us much of what we know today,
but future ventures are in the works
with high hopes of revealing
more of Mercury's secrets.